# Edgetics
This is R work in progress and does not represent the finished source code!

The majority of complex biological functions in the cell occur as a result of one or more cellular components exerting their influence on other cellular components. Many of these functions are based upon protein interactions and a large body of scientific evidence exists in the form of protein to protein interaction databases. The relationships between proteins can be represented by graphs where the proteins are the nodes (vertices) and the interactions between them are represented by links (edges). Recent work with these databases has revealed the modular nature of proteins as they cooperative to achieve various functions but also that diseases are  interlinked within their own networks. In this paper we show how modifications to the network structure by deleting and adding links (edges) can represent mutations within the gene and account for the nature of some diseases. This emerging new field called 'edgetics' is starting to provide an explanation of disease causing mutations.
We are interested in several types of mutations including single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP), these mutations occur in a gene and can cause a change in how proteins are expressed. For example a SNP that changes the genetic code (nucleotide) a 'T' to an 'A' in the gene that encodes the Beta Haemoglobin protein causes sickle cell anemia by changing glutamic acid into valine. The functionality of the protein in this instance has been completely disrupted by the substitution. Other mutations involve deletions of several base-pairs and also insertion of additional base-pairs.  Not every mutation causes complete loss of function, since this is dependent on where it occurs and thus may reduce functionality to a greater or lessor extent or have no-effect. 

The role of genetics dominates almost all of human diseases, even those where the environment does play a significant factor. Many diseases such as cystic fibrosis can be identified with a single defective gene and as such are described as Mendelian because they follow Mendel's law of inheritance. Other diseases do not follow Mendel's law and are the result of the interaction between several genes and environmental factors. These are classed as complex diseases.

We reviewed the literature for the known mutations and their effects on the cystinotic phenotype  - i.e. to identify the type of mutation such SNP, missense, deletion or insertion and the known effects on cystine transport function such as complete loss, partial loss  or unaffected. Using this information we were able to gather further data regarding where the mutation occurred in the gene, in particular the exon where it was located and the amino acid chain that it produces. 

[alt tag](https://raw.github.com/kenmcgarry/Edgetics/edgetics1.png)